gap in england but jonathan will slow
down over april
i'm gonna have to uh interrupt you now
we have the prime minister accompanied
by chris whitty and professor patrick
valance good afternoon and welcome to
this press conference on what has been
a big day for many of us with the first
chance to see friends and family
outdoors
where there are six people or two
households and i want to congratulate
the members of
ilkeston cycling club in derbyshire that
set off at midnight
the swimmers who broached the chilly
waters of the hillingdon lido the crack
of dawn
and more than anything i know how much
it will have meant
to millions of people to have joined
someone else
for a cup of tea in the garden and i
must stress
that it's only because of months of
sacrifice and effort
that we can take this small step towards
freedom
today and we must proceed with caution
it's it's great to see that yesterday we
recorded
the lowest number of new infections for
six months
deaths and hospital admissions across
the uk
are continuing to fall but
that wave is still rising across the
channel and
it's inevitable as we advance on this
road map
that there will be more infections and
unavoidably
more hospitalizations and sadly more
deaths
so what we need to do is to continue
flat out
to build the immunity of our population
build our defenses against that wave
when it comes and now that we've
vaccinated more than 30 million adults
across the united kingdom it's more
vital
than ever that we protect the most
vulnerable the evidence
seems pretty clear that vaccinating the
elderly and vulnerable has helped to
drive down
rates of hospitalization and death
and now we want to reinforce that
prediction
with a second dose so for many people
april will be the second dose month
please take up your appointment when
it's your turn
and at the same time as we push forwards
with our program
to offer a vaccination to all adults
by the end of july we're building up
our own long-term uk manufacturing
capabilities i i've already told you
that novavax
a potentially significant new weapon in
our armory
against kovid is going to be made at
fujifilm
in the in the northeast and i can today
announce that
the vaccine task force has reached an
agreement with glaxosmithkline
to finish and bottle this precious fluid
also in the northeast giving us between
50 and 60 million doses
of uk max made vaccine subject to the
right approvals
from the mhra and then of course
there is one other way we can all build
our own
individual defenses against covid
and enjoy ourselves at the same time and
that is to take more
exercise and so i'm personally thrilled
that i will be able
uh to play tennis for instance and
without being remotely preachy
i do hope that we can take advantage of
uh this moment and the beautiful weather
to play sport
to take exercise to have fun and build
our national resilience in that way too
and remember that outdoors is generally
much safer
than indoors and the way to continue
on our cautious but irreversible road
map to freedom
is to follow the rules and remember
hands face space
and fresh air thanks very much i'm now
going to
hand over to chris for the slides thank
you prime minister
first slide please so the first slide
shows the pattern since september of the
number of people testing positive for
covid
in the uk and as you can see this has
dropped a long way
from the peak in january although it is
now flattening out and i'll come on to
why that is in a minute next slide
please
fortunately the number of people in
hospital in with covid
in the uk is continuing to fall and
as you can see this is now down to much
lower levels than it was
last month and the month before that
next slide please and
the uh the best news really on this is
that the number of deaths
of people who had a positive test for
covid
in the uk is continuing to fall
and the most recent seven day average is
deaths next slide please
and this is partly due to lockdown and a
large part of this is due to lockdown
but also partly and increasingly due to
the vaccine rollout
and this slide shows the steady increase
in the blue bars of people who've had
their first
dose of vaccine and in the orange at the
bottom
those who are having their second dose
of the vaccine and as the prime minister
says
the number of people having a second
dose is going to increase
significantly over the next month and it
is essential that people do come for
their second dose
next slide please uh
i thought we would show we should show
um two slides
really just to put a little bit of uh
detail
uh on this and the first of these uh is
to compare the age distribution
of people who sadly have died from covid
on the left
and what you have is the ages steadily
going up from
0 to 4 at the bottom up to 90 at the top
and the red line is the point at which
vaccination has reached so it's reached
down to those who are 50 and above
plus people who got pre-existing health
conditions
the final cases have been found and i
really want to stress that anybody
who in that group in those 50 or above
who has not
been called for a vaccination should
make contact with a
doctor but and this is an important but
uh the on the right what we have is the
total number of people
who have actually uh acquired kovid
and as you can see on that the great
majority
of people who have acquired kovid are
actually younger than this
so the majority of transmission is in
younger age groups who have not yet been
vaccinated
unless people have got pre-existing
health conditions or they're a health or
social care worker or care for someone
who is vulnerable
so we therefore anticipate that
as there is gradual unlocking in the way
the prime minister is described
it is inevitable that there will be
some increase in the number of cases
because the people who are most likely
to catch
and to transmit kovid are in that
younger
unvaccinated group so the vaccination
has had a really big impact
on helping to protect against people
dying from covid although it is not a
complete protection
but it will have less impact on
transmission because of this
age distribution next slide please
the second new point i really just
wanted to make and then sir patrick is
going to make a point uh about vaccines
uh is to say that the bit of the
road map opening up that has happened so
far
is opening up schools and what you can
see on this and i think this is likely
to become clearer over the next
uh two weeks is that
there has been a steady decrease in the
rates of covid
over the last several weeks in most age
groups
but there's been a flattening and
possibly even a slight uptick
in transmission amongst people our
children of school
age this isn't a dramatic increase at
this point
but this is inevitable that as bits of
society open up
there will be some increases in
transmission and we should
expect that that is uh one of the things
we have to anticipate will happen
as some opening ups occur so patrick
just wanted to make in some additional
points on the vaccine
thank you can have the next slide please
so a few points about vaccine if you
look at the left hand
part of this figure in the blue
this is giving an illustration based on
the
current and recent rates of infection
across the community roughly how many
people
you'd expect to be in hospital or to be
hospitalized
over a four week period so if you take
the
top age group in the 25 to 34
age group out of a hundred thousand
people
in the population of that age over a
four week period
roughly seven people would expect to be
hos you'd expect to be hospitalized
if you go to the next age group 35 to 44
so you took 100
000 people in the community over a month
four week period
you'd expect roughly 14 people
45 to 54 21
people and 55 to 64
29 people if you went to higher ages of
course you get even more so this just
reinforces the point
that as people get older the risk of
hospitalization
from infection is greater now if you
look at the right hand side
this tells you what would happen if all
of those people
were vaccinated so if everybody were
vaccinated and this is taking a single
dose so it's giving roughly an eighty
percent
protect protection you'd find that in
the
youngest age group they're 25 to 34
instead of there being
seven people hospitalized over a month
it would be one or maybe two
35 to 44 instead of it being 14 it would
be
two three as you go to the higher ages
45 to 54
instead of 21 it would be four and at
the
highest age group on this 55 to 64 it
would be roughly six people instead of
the
29. so there are three points i want to
make first is the one that
as you get older there's a higher risk
from this disease as chris has also
shown
the second is that the vaccines are very
effective
at reducing hospitalization in everyone
who gets them
and so the message is everybody who's
asked to come forward for a vaccine
please get the vaccine but the third
message
is that the vaccines are not 100
protective
and this is at the current rates of
infection
if the rates were much higher then
obviously the amount of hospitalization
would be higher
which reinforces the point that the
thing that we all must do is try and
keep rates down
and be sensible as we unlock and get
back to more interaction thank you
thanks
very much patrick thank you chris let's
go to beatrice from london
with restrictions easing people are
slowly being reunited with their
families
for those with family abroad they have
not been able to see them for months
will a similar easing take place for
those with family abroad
or will seeing family be incorporated as
an exception to international travel
like the exception to travel for
business purposes
beatrice thanks very much i think that
the the most important
thing that we've got to do right now as
we uh
continue to immunize uh great numbers of
people in this country is
is protect our country insofar as we can
and
it's never going to be perfect but do as
much as we can to prevent
the virus coming back in from abroad and
new variants
uh coming in from abroad so the rules
about uh what
you can do what people can do to see
their families abroad will be governed
entirely
uh by the rules that uh cover uh
uh travel abroad and uh people coming
from abroad so
uh at the moment as you know uh it's
still uh forbidden to
to travel uh we'll be saying uh a bit
more on april the fifth
about what the the global travel task
force has
has come up with uh and um
clearly at the moment it is you know
there are lots of
countries that are on a red list 35
countries on a red list
where we have very stringent uh measures
in place
uh for them for people arriving from
those countries have to go immediately
into hotel quarantine and if you're
coming from anywhere else
you also face uh pretty tough quarantine
rules so
um uh we will be beatrice we will be
saying more
about um uh seeing family
abroad and and travel abroad but it it
won't be until
at least april the 5th any anybody want
to
say any more on that thanks beatrice
let's go to julia from margate
julius asks myself and my husband have
had our first dose of the fisa vaccine
and are due to have our second dose at
the end of april will this be impacted
by the recent shortage of supplies and
what does the government plan
to do about it well julie i think i can
answer that question very uh briefly and
succinctly by saying that uh there isn't
any
need to worry about a shortage of uh
pfizer for the second
dose as far as we can uh see at the
moment
and uh we're going to continue to uh to
roll that out and
and supply that and as i said april is
going to be the
the second dose month uh very important
everybody gets there
uh their second dose uh hugh pima from
the bbc
thank you very much prime minister isn't
there a danger of mixed messaging
when you talk both about a road map to
freedom and getting back towards normal
life but also the need to be cautious
because of cases rising in some parts of
europe
and a question for professor whitty and
sir patrick valance how concerned are
you
about what's happening in some european
countries with cases and what that might
mean for the uk
and have you given your approval to the
next stage of easing on april the 12th
the opening of outdoor hospitality and
non-essential retail and so on
well thanks very much hugh and you're
absolutely right that the
uh we're pleased to be able to
uh to have some measure of uh of
relaxation
today it is important it is valuable and
i know it will be prized by
uh by people but also very important to
stress that we are continuing to be
uh cautious and uh the whole point about
the
uh the road map and the time scale that
we've got it gives us a chance to
evaluate the uh the data as we go
forward and
uh as for the uh for the april
the the 12th uh phase we'll be we'll be
saying more about that in in due course
obviously
same goes for may 17th uh june the 21st
they all depend on uh on the four on the
four conditions but i i wonder whether
uh
chris or patrick you want to say more
yes sorry sorry
um well i think when we discuss the
gap between stages the idea was to have
five weeks to allow
data to be assessed in the fourth week
which is the earliest we think we can
get a good handle
on what's happened and so that's next
week so that's when the analysis of
the effects of the initial opening of
going back to school
can be assessed and at that point we'll
be able to give the recommendations
so far as chris has laid out
everything's moving in the right
direction but we need to do a formal
data analysis next week
in terms of the um are we concerned
about what's happening in europe and
elsewhere well i mean in those
you know anybody would be concerned
about any country in the world where
rates are going up because that has a
big impact on people's health and lives
so i think you know as as citizens of
the world we will all be concerned about
any
of those countries for the uk uh there
are essentially there are two risks
there's always a higher risk
if any country's got a higher rate than
you have then there is a risk of net
importation of
covid but the much bigger risk and the
one that we're all concerned about
is the risk of variance of concern these
are uh
covered variants which might and i want
to stress the word might
have a a problem with the vaccine where
it would the vaccine is less effective
against them
and so the main thing we're concerned
about is the risk of importing
into the uk variants which uh could have
a reduced
uh effectiveness of the vaccines we're
currently using
uh now in the long term there would be
ways around that but in the short term
that is the principal the thing that's
driving concerns about border issues at
this stage
uh in terms of giving approval uh it's
not really for
uh patrick or me to give approval of
things but certainly we've been involved
heavily in all the decisions
uh in terms of leaving giving technical
advice to ministers
thanks very much you called in itv
thank you prime minister uh there's a
great sense of
release around the country today with
the lifting of some restrictions
do you worry at all that people might
take that
too far and what sort of word of warning
would you give
people who are attempted that way and
for professor witty um
you showed us a graph of how uh the
reopening of schools more fully created
a bit of an uptick
do you worry at all that today's
relaxations could also eventually cause
a bit of an uptick in the numbers of
cases
and how well at this point do you think
we are protected
by the vaccination program as a country
carl yes you're absolutely right to put
the emphasis on
on caution the vaccine rollout has been
very impressive and you know thanks to
everybody who's been
involved in it but what we what we don't
know
is exactly how strong our fortifications
now are how robust our uh defenses
are against an another wave and we've
seen what
what's been happening that's why i
stress what's happening with our
european friends because
uh historically at least uh there's been
a
a time lag and then we've had a a wave
ourselves and
that's why you know i just stress the
importance of everybody
maintaining the uh the the discipline
that people have shown for so long
and continuing with the the cautious uh
but we hope
irreversible uh roadmap that were that
we've set out
um in terms of the question you asked uh
me
yes there is a high likelihood that
there will be some uptick as a result of
the
relaxations today and that was
anticipated right from the beginning of
trying to lay out
where the road map would go and if you
think about the the
gra for the graph that i showed what it
shows is that the
high proportion of those who will both
catch and transmit kovid
have not been vaccinated yet and
so i would not anticipate that
vaccination will reduce transmission
between people in those ages
at all at this point in time but and
this is the big but
the point the prime minister was making
that has been stressed repeatedly
is that if people stick to social
distancing rules and they're outside
the risk of transmission is massively
lower
than if they are very close together and
inside
so provided people are sensible about
these and people throughout the entire
covid
uh pandemic in the uk have really been
very sensible incredibly uh
sort of respectful of sticking to the
rules and guidelines
provided people stick to outdoors and at
a distance if it's people
who are not in their households the
impact on in terms of an uptick
should be modest but i think it would
not be realistic to think
there will be no impact and that is
something we are we're all aware of
the only thing just to add is it's
important to remember as vaccination
rolls out
that once you've been vaccinated it
takes three weeks or so before you get
some protection from the vaccine it's
very important to recognize that even
when vaccination is not an instant thing
it takes a time for the
immunity to to accrue brilliant thanks
so bear three b's kind news
thank you prime minister you've asked a
lot of the british people over the past
year and now
even as that vaccination program has
rolled out and cases are now their
lowest level since last october
you are still hugely restricting our
personal lives
and our liberties do you accept that you
are testing
the patience of the public and are you
concerned that people will stop
listening and to professor whitty with
over
30 million adults now having received a
jab
you've said another covered surge would
be met with a wall of vaccinated people
with that in mind are we really at risk
of a third wave the sort we're seeing
in continental europe or can the british
people
finally begin to relax and just quickly
to sir patrick
when will the doses those 50 to 60
million doses that the prime minister
just talked about of the novovax
uh vaccine when would they be available
that's not for me i don't think uh let
me let me go
uh straight back to you beth on that
that point about you know asking a lot
of people
and yes of course i i accept that and
i know how much government has asked of
of the people in the last year but i
also know how magnificently
with what incredible uh patients and
fortitude people have
responded and it's my view beth that
overwhelmingly people are determined
to continue uh to to do that and they
they do understand
the need for for caution uh i think
overwhelmingly people understand
uh that uh when it comes to this road
map the more we the better we stick to
it the more
the more cautious we are the better the
chance we have of
making sure that it is indeed
irreversible and we're able to
to go forward in the in the way that we
want in terms of the question
you asked uh to me um what is
what patrick's slide i think showed is
that
we do have a kind of a wall of
vaccination that will get stronger with
the second vaccines and i want to repeat
my emphasis
it is critical people get their second
vaccine but it is not a complete wall
it's a kind of leaky wall and therefore
there will always be some people who
either
have chosen not to be vaccinated or
where the vaccine has had much less
effect and if we get a small surge
uh there will be cases of people who
have been vaccinated who will have
uh severe disease and there will be
cases of people who
are not vaccinated much higher
proportion who will get severe disease
and some of those will go on to die if
we get a very big
wave that would obviously lead to a
significant impact so that's the reason
why the prime minister and ministers
have been
absolutely determined
that this is a slow and steady unlocking
looking at data between each step
because what we're trying we're except
we accept that
with this highly transmissible virus of
course there will be an increase in
transmission as we unlock
vaccines will help hem it in as we go
down the ages
but it's going to take a while before
we've got the full protection and even
when we have
there will be some upsurge the key thing
is to keep that rate down
and to make sure as many people as
possible are vaccinated in particular
the most vulnerable
and keeping the rate down also stops the
likelihood of more
variants emerging so it's important we
keep on top of this
um the nova vast question about is an
operational one about when that's living
i can't answer that for you but what i
will say is that
um nova wax hasn't been through the
regulatory process yet so it would need
to do that as well before anyone can
really
be sure exactly when that would come
what i can say is that they are
are already making it at the uh the site
in indyside they're they're already
making the
backs of pending the uh the mhra uh
approvals jason groves uh daily mail
thank you uh professor whitty if
someone's had
both their vaccine shots as many people
now have
why shouldn't they hug their
grandchildren this easter are they not
now as safe as they're going to be for
their foreseeable future and
prime minister you mentioned uh the
encouraging signs on
some of the graphs the death rate now uh
is round about where it was uh when we
unlocked indoor socializing last year if
it was
good enough to do that last year why
isn't it good enough to do that this
year
uh do you want to do hugging first who's
doing i'll i'll i'll take
uh take that on the thing to understand
with vaccines is they provide
increasing levels of protection as we go
through the first vaccine provides
a high degree of protection the second
vaccine for the same person
provides greater protection but there's
still some vulnerability this is the
point that
patrick slide was making then actually
having
people around someone who has been
vaccinated
who are themselves vaccinated provides a
further level of protection
and then keeping the key thing is
keeping the rates right down
makes it very unlikely that someone who
comes in even if they have have been
vaccinated certain
so even if they haven't been vaccinated
certainly if they have
will actually have covert and be able to
pass it on but what we're trying to do
is get to the point where
all of those protections are in place
and we are not yet at that stage we're
getting there
steadily the extraordinary rollout by
the nhs i think is
really remarkable and that is going
through at a real pace
but the great majority of people have
not yet had their second vaccine
and if they're meeting people who are
under the age of 50
they will not have had their vaccination
unless they actually have a pre-existing
health condition
or are a healthcare worker i would like
to
re-stress a point that patrick made
also which is that people are not
immediately protected when they're
vaccinated
and i think it is important people to
remember that there is a period of time
uh of uh if you're an older citizen
maybe three weeks or so between the time
that you get vaccinated and the time
when the protection kicks in
uh it will be good protection but it
won't be absolutely complete protection
i that's an incredibly important point
for everybody to to remember
right now and jason i think the answer
is to your question is really contained
in some of the slides that we saw
earlier where you
already because of the uh the relaxation
that we've seen
almost certainly because of the uh the
opening of of schools again you're
starting to see
some of those uh graphs starting to curl
a bit like old british rail sandwiches
uh moving upwards um uh a little bit
in the in the younger groups uh and you
you've seen what's happening in the
uh uh on the continent uh we and we've
seen that
uh happen before that's why it's it's so
vital that
you know we do what we're doing right
now we we continue to
to fortify the the population roll out
the uh the vaccine that the
the speed that we uh that we are uh
make sure as as chris and patrick say
everybody gets the
the second dose when they're uh they're
asked uh
to uh to come forward uh when they're
given their turn
uh but um you know just make sure that
we
uh are cautious in our approach i think
that's the
the way to get the results that we that
we want
let's go now to jasmine uh cameron
chilesi of the ft
thank you the sport and tourism minister
said earlier this morning that police
will be able to intervene and fine
any law breakers where necessary but how
realistic is that
will police officers be going around
breaking up groups of more than six
outside
do you think that would be appropriate
and are you confident that the rules are
clear enough to facilitate
a consistent and fair approach to
policing across the country
and secondly as the number of
coronavirus infections grows throughout
europe
why have countries like france not yet
been added to the red list
and what is your response prime minister
to concerns that throughout the pandemic
the uk has been slow to secure our
borders from cases coming in from abroad
thank you thanks very much jasmine on
the
first point about uh the policing the
police has done absolutely outstanding
job throughout this
uh pandemic and i think they've handed
out
about 70 000 fines at least for various
breaches of one kind
uh or another and i make no you know i
make no apology
uh for for that uh they will continue to
uh to do their best but it depends more
than
uh depends on the piece depends on
general public
understanding of what we've all got to
do and that in a way has been
even more impressive that's been the
single thing that's made all this
uh all this possible on uh the
imports of new variants from abroad and
our border region we have one of the
toughest regimes in the in the world
some
some european countries jasmine don't
even have uh
many european countries don't even have
the hotel quarantine of the kind that we
have in the
in the uk and there are 35 countries
already
on the on the red list uh we're looking
uh very closely at what's going on in in
france we keep it under
on the constant uh review of course
those i've explained
uh to people before there is the issue
uh that
our uh our trade in medicines and food
does depend uh very much on those on
those short straights so we have to make
sure that we manage
the disruption as well uh thank you very
much jasmine let's go to uh sapphire
slay of the evening standard
thank you prime minister you said that
you want this unlocking to be
irreversible
can you categorically rule out another
full
lockdown and my second question is for
professor chris witte
an evening standard story today revealed
that care home staff in london are the
least
likely to take up the vaccine the lowest
take-up in the whole country is in
lambeth where just 45
of staff working in homes for the
elderly had taken it up
are you shocked by that figure and do
you think that level offers enough
protection for residents
well uh sophia i think the answer to
your your excellent question is
uh is yes but with you know two
at least two very important provisos uh
uh
yes if everybody obviously continues to
uh obey the guidance with sufficient
uh caution and we continue to work
together uh to keep the the virus under
control and get it done in the way that
we have
uh and yes if the uh the vaccine
uh rollout uh continues and the vaccines
continue to be
as effective as it looks as though
they uh could be or looks as though they
are a sapphire so
those are the uh the two conditions that
would have to be
uh to be satisfied but you know i'm i'm
i'm
i'm hopeful i think that were i don't
see anything in the data
right now uh that would cause us to to
deviate
uh from the from the road map um but
you know we've got to remain humble in
the face of nature
and we've got to be prepared to do
whatever it takes to protect the british
public which has been our
our approach uh throughout um
on the question uh to me um the great
majority
actually of care home staff nationally
have
had the vaccine and as have an even
greater proportion of
health care staff i think for those who
don't i think there are probably
three things it's really important to
stress
i mean the first thing is this vaccine
will protect you and your family
and i think it is important that people
really understand that this is
uh of it's important for everyone but
it's important for the individual who
has the vaccine
themselves and those around them there's
now evidence that
if you have a vaccine as a health or
social care worker it's likely that that
is going to protect
uh provide protection to your family
second thing
uh is that there is unfortunately
some misinformation about vaccines and
the key thing
is to go to reliable sources if you're
hearing
stories about vaccines and you're
concerned about them go to reliable
sources
talk to medical staff who can actually
lay out the facts because the you know
compared to the risk of
covid the risk of the vaccines is much
smaller and that's the whole point about
all drugs and all vaccines is you're
doing it because the risk of
actually not being vaccinated is
substantially greater than the risk of
being vaccinated
and the third point specifically on on
care staff
certainly uh when we're talking about
medical or nursing staff
i've said before and i will say very uh
unambiguously
i do consider people who are looking
after vulnerable
other people who are very vulnerable do
have a professional responsibility
to get vaccinated and to do other things
that help protect
the people who they're looking after
it's not just an issue about vaccination
this is across the board
vaccination is one of those issues and
so it is important that people
view it both for themselves for their
families
but also take their professional
responsibilities seriously
brilliant i think that's anything to our
bad rick thank you all very much see you
next time
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news
you